Security Council Distr.: General 26 July 2000

Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations

Transitional Administration in East Timor

(for the period 27 January-26 July 2000)

I. Introduction Timorese, appointed by the Transitional Administrator as follows: one from each of the 13 districts, 7 from political parties within the National Council of 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to Timorese Resistance (CNRT), three from other parties, Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of 25 October and one each representing youth, students, non- 1999, by which the Council decided to establish the governmental organizations, the professions, farmers, United Nations Transitional Administration in East labour, business, the Catholic Church, the Protestant Timor (UNTAET). In paragraph 18 of that resolution, Church and the Muslim community. Consultations are the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit under way regarding the selection of the Council’s a report within three months of the date of adoption of members. that resolution and every six months thereafter. The current report covers the activities of UNTAET and 3. At the same time, UNTAET reorganized itself to developments in East Timor since the submission of resemble more closely the future government and to the last report on 26 January 2000. During this period, increase the direct participation of the Timorese, who the Council received five public briefings, which are thus assume a greater share of the political contained in the Council’s records (S/PV.4097, responsibility. Eight portfolios were created: internal S/PV.4114, S/PV.4133, S/PV.4147 and S/PV.4165). administration, infrastructure, economic affairs, social Matters covered in those briefings will not be repeated affairs, finance, justice, police and emergency services, here, except in summary form. Seventeen regulations and political affairs. The first four have been entrusted issued by UNTAET during this period will be issued as to East Timorese, the other four to senior UNTAET an addendum to this report. staff members. They were sworn in on 15 and 17 July. The eight officials form a Cabinet chaired by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It is II. Political transition responsible for formulating policies and recommending regulations and directives for consideration by the 2. The 15-member National Consultative Council National Council. The Special Representative of the (NCC), which was established in December 1999, Secretary-General retains full responsibility as played a crucial role as the primary mechanism through Transitional Administrator in accordance with Security which the East Timorese participated in UNTAET’s Council resolution 1272 (1999). decision-making. However, it became clear over time that its membership needed to be expanded to facilitate 4. When UNTAET was established, there was no broader participation in policy-making. After intensive history of open and democratic political activity in East consultation, the National Council (NC) was created on Timor. Since then, CNRT and its component parties 14 July to replace NCC. It will have 33 members, all have been active, and new political organizations have

00-55073 (E) 260700 `````````

emerged. The Socialist Party of East Timor, the Labour visited Dili on 29 February, where he was warmly Party, the Popular Defence Council of the Democratic welcomed. On this occasion, agreements were signed, Republic of East Timor (CPD-RDTL) and the United concerning the promotion of trade and communication, Christian Democracy Party have set up branch offices the establishment of representative offices, and and organized demonstrations and other political continued access by East Timorese to academic events. The East Timor National Liberation Front institutions in Indonesia. Agreement was also reached (FRETILIN), the largest component of CNRT, on the establishment of a border regime to facilitate organized a series of regional conferences, culminating access for people and goods between the Oecussi in a national conference in Dili last May. enclave and the rest of East Timor as well as cross- border trade. 5. Regrettably, there have been disturbing cases of intimidation against groups and parties not under the 9. Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special CNRT umbrella. CPD-RDTL, a group that split from Representative of the Secretary-General, has twice FRETILIN, has encountered sometimes violent CNRT visited Jakarta since then and Mr. Xanana Gusmão, opposition, especially in the Suai area. In June, President of CNRT, visited Jakarta on 28 April, where unknown assailants vandalized the Dili office of the he met with President Wahid and senior government Student Solidarity Council, one of the strongest pro- officials to further strengthen bilateral relations. independence groups in East Timor prior to the popular 10. On 6 April, Indonesia and UNTAET concluded a consultation. In March, death threats were directed Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation in against staff of the Catholic Radio Timor Kmanek to legal, judicial and human rights matters. In accordance prevent their announcers’ speaking about politics on with the memorandum, UNTAET has assisted the the radio. Ethnic and religious minorities have also Indonesian authorities in their efforts to identify and been the targets of harassment and intimidation. On 8 prosecute those responsible for human rights violations June, the Protestant churches in Ermera and Aileu were in East Timor in 1999. To this end, UNTAET has burned. There were also several attacks on the mosque located and interviewed witnesses and provided the in Dili, and ethnic Chinese were threatened and results to Indonesian investigators. harassed. 11. On 5 July, agreement was reached on the 6. In order to counter these tendencies and prepare establishment of a Joint Border Committee, which is the population for democratic elections, UNTAET has responsible for managing all cross-border matters. Key launched a programme entitled “The future of outstanding issues are an arrangement for transit democracy in East Timor” which targets a broad cross- between the Oecussi enclave and the rest of East section of East Timorese society. The programme aims Timor, which is critical for the future well-being of to promote civic education, constitutional development, Oecussi, and the payment of pensions to former the rule of law and political education. UNTAET has employees who wish to reside in East Timor. The early also disseminated information on human rights through resolution of this question would encourage many its police and non-governmental organizations and is refugees to return home. working with local community leaders to develop a culture of tolerance. 12. UNTAET has established offices in Jakarta and Kupang, and Indonesia has a mission in East Timor. 7. Apart from these special efforts, UNTAET has The office in Kupang helped coordinate UNTAET’s promoted the free flow of information and ideas by assistance to flood victims on both sides of the border supporting local media (two newspapers and two news between East and West Timor in May. It has been magazines) and through its own operations (radio, closely involved with the Office of the United Nations limited television broadcasts, fortnightly newsletter), as High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in well as through providing training for East Timorese. initiatives designed to encourage reconciliation and the return of the refugees who remain in West Timor and III. Relations with Indonesia Java.

8. The normalization of relations between Indonesia and East Timor has progressed well. President Wahid

2

IV. Refugees V. Governance and public

administration 13. More than 167,000 refugees have returned from Indonesia, primarily from West Timor. The repatriation Civil service effort is coordinated by UNHCR; the International Organization for Migration (IOM) arranges their 18. UNTAET has continued to build the foundations movement to their destinations. This activity has of governance, including a legal framework, a central proceeded with few incidents and the reintegration of financial capacity and a civil service structure. This has the refugees into their original communities has been been done with a view to transferring administrative generally smooth. functions to a sustainable East Timorese administration. The recruitment of Timorese civil 14. UNTAET supported the work of UNHCR at the servants is conducted through an open process based on political level by promoting reconciliation and competition and merit, under the supervision of the preparing the communities in East Timor for the return Public Service Commission. of those of the refugees who had opposed independence. This was done in discussions involving 19. There are now 5,275 civil service employees in local organizations and, often, the church. UNTAET the East Timor administration, including teachers and also arranged visits to East Timor by some militia health workers on temporary contracts. Permanent leaders so that they would know what to expect when hiring began in July and the Civil Service Academy they and their followers returned. was inaugurated on 8 May. In cooperation with UNTAET, the United Nations Development 15. The Governor of West Timor, Mr. Piet Tallo, Programme (UNDP) is preparing a comprehensive visited East Timor on 8 June and met Mr. Vieira de project, amounting to approximately US$ 30 million, Mello and Mr. Xanana Gusmão as well as other East for capacity-building in governance and public Timorese leaders. Subsequently, on 9 and 10 June, the administration. In the second half of the year, UNDP, in Bishop of Baucau, Mr. Basilio Nascimento, visited conjunction with Portugal’s National Institute of Public West Timor. Administration, will provide courses for political 16. Despite these efforts, an estimated 85,000 to leaders in globalization, constitutional issues, project 120,000 refugees remain in camps in West Timor, development and implementation, and ethics for 210 where militias opposed to independence continue to persons. UNTAET is working with CNRT and donors exercise great influence and impede the work of to establish a diplomatic training course; the first round UNHCR by intimidation and violence. As a result, an of training for 50 students will begin on 31 July. important effort by UNHCR to register refugees and determine whether they wished to return or be resettled Public finance was repeatedly delayed and had to be postponed indefinitely earlier this month, when militia members attacked UNHCR’s workers. 20. During the reporting period, UNTAET established the Central Fiscal Authority and the Central 17. UNHCR has increased its efforts to persuade the Payments Office. Recruitment of Timorese staff has Indonesian authorities to assume their obligations and begun and will be followed by specialized training, act on commitments made. These include free and assisted by the Asian Development Bank. The Treasury unhindered access to the refugees, ensuring the safety has been established within the Central Fiscal of humanitarian workers and the separation of former Authority. It is responsible for the execution of the military personnel, police and civil servants from the budget, including expenditure, control and monitoring. refugees. If these obligations are not met, UNHCR may The Revenue Service has been established and a tax be compelled to withdraw from some or all camps. system instituted, which includes a service tax on restaurants, hotels, telecommunications and transport rentals.

21. The consolidated budget for 2000/01, and projections for the next two years were presented to

3

donors in Lisbon in June and were favourably received. UNTAET is trying to normalize border trade with West The budget provides for recurrent spending of US$ Timor in order to improve the supply of basic goods. 43.63 million and capital spending of US$ 15.6 25. To provide immediate relief and also to launch million. Financing this budget will require additional the repair of the infrastructure, quick-impact projects contributions to the UNTAET Trust Fund of US$ 16 have been carried out throughout the country. Thirty million. Contributions to the Trust Fund stand at about thousand persons have been employed under projects US$ 28.5 million. overseen by the United States Agency for International 22. Public spending under the UNTAET Trust Fund Development (USAID), injecting US$ 3.5 million into was limited in the first months of the mission because the local economy. The Japanese International of normal delays as programmes were being planned, Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Australian Agency with expenses being met by other agencies as part of for International Development (AusAID) have funded relief programmes, and difficulties in the procurement US$ 1.3 million in reconstruction projects (mainly road of certain goods and services, as well as limitations of rehabilitation) which have also provided temporary port and warehouse capacity. These obstacles have employment. The UNTAET Trust Fund and United essentially been overcome. Disbursements from the Nations agencies have committed over US$ 1 million, UNTAET Trust Fund so far total over US$ 3 million on providing employment to 5,350 persons. These civil service salaries, quick-impact projects and programmes are coming to an end, and it will fall more expenditures for light capital equipment and and more to the private sector to create employment miscellaneous services. A further US$ 7.9 million has opportunities. been committed for furniture and equipment for the 26. Business activity has expanded on a moderate health, education and social affairs departments. scale. By the end of June, 2,696 private businesses had 23. A source of revenue for East Timor is the been registered, with over 70 per cent coming from the exploitation of petroleum in the “Timor Gap” region of business community. The World Bank-administered the Timor Sea. In early February, to ensure the Trust Fund for East Timor (TFET) has established the continued and smooth commercial development of the Small Loans Enterprise Programme to assist in the Timor Gap, UNTAET signed a Memorandum of rapid rehabilitation of small businesses. Up to US$ 10 Understanding with Australia in which UNTAET, on million will be lent over two years; the first tranche behalf of East Timor, agreed to continue the terms of amounting to US$ 4 million is currently being the Treaty between Australia and the Republic of disbursed. UNTAET has established an Investment Indonesia on the Zone of Cooperation in an Area Promotion Unit to assist foreign investors. between the Indonesian Province of East Timor and 27. Some 80 per cent of the population depend on Northern Australia (Timor Gap Treaty). This was agriculture for their livelihood. This sector saw a fairly without prejudice to position of the future government strong recovery in the first half of this year, owing to a of an independent East Timor. In consultation with the good coffee crop and strong domestic demand. Public East Timorese leaders, UNTAET has been in touch investment is foreseen to promote recovery and reduce with the Government of Australia, with a view to poverty in rural areas and to support medium-term working out a new legal regime that would come into initiatives to create a sustainable base for future force at independence. increases in productivity. A regulation was promulgated in May prohibiting the logging and export Economy of wood from East Timor in order to halt the damage already caused by unregulated logging. The design of projects began in July to ensure the protection and 24. The collapse of both the public and private preservation of existing water supplies through sectors following last year’s violence, in conjunction community-based watershed management and with large-scale destruction, had a devastating effect on reforestation programmes. the economy. The gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have shrunk in 1999 by as much as 38 per 28. East Timor has inherited a complex and often cent. Unemployment soared, especially in the urban contradictory system of land ownership. This has areas. The prices of fuel and other basic goods rose caused uncertainty and many disputes. UNTAET is steeply, in part reflecting the removal of subsidies.

4

making preparations for a Land and Property materials and personnel to effect emergency repairs. Commission to restore and maintain the land registry; No major outbreaks of disease or serious water resolve disputes through mediation, arbitration and, shortages have been reported. By May, water supplies where necessary, adjudication; and allocate abandoned in all 13 of East Timor’s main district towns had been public and private property. UNTAET officials are partially restored. currently involved as mediators in the resolution of two 33. Telecommunications remain seriously deficient. complex land disputes in Viqueque and Baucau. Limited mobile phone coverage in Dili and parts of Baucau and Suai, and landlines in Dili are provided by Infrastructure a private company on a temporary basis. The East Timorese postal service commenced operations at the end of April and provides service internationally via 29. Prolonged rains and heavy traffic by the Darwin and internally between Dili and Baucau. International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) and UNTAET have exacerbated the already poor condition 34. On 21 February, the World Bank and UNTAET of the road network. Several main arteries closed signed a grant agreement for a community during April and May owing to land slips and the empowerment project, which links support for collapse of bridges. In February, a mission coordinated rehabilitation and income-generating activities with the by the Asian Development Bank agreed on a remedial strengthening of the capacity of subdistricts and strategy for emergency rehabilitation, restoring normal villages, through elected representatives, to determine government services for routine, emergency and their priorities and manage the projects they select. The periodic maintenance, and implementing a capital project has three major components — grants to programme of pavement rehabilitation and communities through local community councils, a strengthening. The full contracts were mobilized in cultural heritage project and a civil society early June. development fund. Over 340 councils have been formed and more than 70 facilitators have been trained 30. Dili’s port is a critical bottleneck, and and fielded through nine districts. The project totals rehabilitation work is under way to increase its US$ 21.5 million over two and a half years. capacity at a cost of approximately US$ 7 million. Japan will provide navigational equipment worth US$ 2.6 million. The airports in Dili and Baucau have Education suffered damage owing to inadequate maintenance, destruction, theft of equipment and heavy use over 35. The vast majority of primary school children and recent months. Emergency runway repairs are under teachers were back in school by the end of April. Some way in Dili. 200,000 students will participate in the coming school 31. Intensive efforts were undertaken to restore year. Four thousand seven hundred and forty electricity to Dili and the surrounding villages with schoolteachers are being recruited into the civil service support from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and based on examinations held for this purpose in May. Northern Ireland. However, more needs to be done, and The conditions they face, however, remain very power cuts remain frequent. UNDP will rehabilitate 13 difficult. Supplies are insufficient and, pending their of the remaining rural stations with funding from recruitment, most teachers have been surviving on a Japan, which will also finance the maintenance of a stipend initially supplemented by an allocation of rice power plant in Dili. Portugal is financing the provided since December 1999 by the United Nations rehabilitation of four regional stations. A project led by Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the World Food the Asian Development Bank will support technical Programme (WFP). assistance for the setting of tariffs, metering, billing 36. Many schools are structurally unsound and need accounts, and financial management systems. to be demolished. A US$ 13.9 million project has been 32. United Nations agencies and non-governmental agreed between UNTAET and the World Bank for a organizations, in conjunction with district rehabilitation programme. The first stage is to repair administrations, have provided the core of assistance in 2,100 primary and secondary school classrooms, the water and sanitation sector, including equipment, supply furniture, books and other instructional

5

materials. Secondly, new schools will be built to mission developed an integrated sector-wide replace some of those to be demolished. Thirdly, a programme funded through the trust fund administered policy development component will be established to by the World Bank, the UNTAET Trust Fund and provide analysis and options for the future national bilateral initiatives. In June, UNTAET and the World education system. There will also be a project on Bank signed a US$ 12.7 million Health Sector quality of instruction, through teacher training and the Rehabilitation and Development Programme which strengthening of local school councils. UNTAET, seeks to address immediate health needs while UNICEF and CNRT are providing short preparation developing an appropriate long-term health system. courses for teachers in the run-up to the next school United Nations organizations, in particular the World year, while Portugal is providing more comprehensive Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF and the United teacher training initiatives to 750 teachers, the number Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), will provide being expected to have risen to 2,500 in the next year. technical and other inputs to the health sector programme. The European Commission Humanitarian 37. Japan, the Ford Foundation and Caritas Norway Office (ECHO) will continue to provide support. have undertaken to support the return of East Timorese students to Indonesian universities to complete their Law and order studies. A list of 989 has been sent to the Department of Education in Indonesia, which will forward it to all relevant institutions. The scholarships will also cover 41. The situation in East Timor has remained stable 500 East Timorese students who are already continuing overall. However, there was a notable increase in low- their studies in Indonesia. Indonesia has provided level personal and property crime. This can be largely assurances that it will complete the scholarships of 162 attributed to the rapid increase in the cost of living, final-year East Timorese students. Applicants are unemployment and rapid, unplanned urbanization. currently being interviewed for teaching positions at Reported assaults rose from 49 in January to 86 in the national university of East Timor, which is June, and thefts from 25 to 45. There were sporadic scheduled to reopen in October. incidents of unrest in Dili, the most serious of which took place on 30 April when a fight between youth groups at a sports stadium moved to the nearby central Health market and continued for several hours, resulting in 4 injured and 18 arrests. Following this incident, the 38. Owing to the collapse of the public health-care police were authorized to carry side arms. system, non-governmental organizations, funded by a number of donors and coordinated by UNTAET, have 42. The Dili courthouse held its first hearings in May, become the main health service providers. In each and the Baucau court opened in late June, to be district, a lead organization has been designated to followed by courts in Oecussi and Suai. Judges have implement national policy and programmes. A national been appointed to all four. Temporary arrangements, tuberculosis campaign has been undertaken in 9 of 13 including travelling judges and prosecutors, will be districts treating more than 1,500 patients. A malaria used to clear the backlog of some 60 cases in the other prevention campaign has also been launched. districts. Six hundred cases are still pending from before the popular consultation; efforts are under way 39. The post-ballot violence damaged 77 per cent of to retrieve the records, but many have been destroyed. the clinics. Since January, 80 health facilities have A total of 16 East Timorese judges, 8 prosecutors and 8 been opened and a number of mobile clinics are public defenders have been appointed. Ten more judges operating. However, there are only 23 Timorese and four prosecutors were recruited at the end of June. medical doctors in the country. It will therefore be All are undergoing continuous training. Four some time before there can be a full Timorese health international judges have also been appointed. Two service. There is not such a shortage of nursing staff, will sit on a panel to hear cases for serious criminal although many will require more training. matters and two on the East Timor Court of Appeal. 40. A multi-donor mission in April defined a short- These judges and prosecutors will also act as mentors term strategy of transition from the emergency phase to for their Timorese colleagues. a more systematic approach to health delivery. The

6

43. Two detention facilities have been opened, in the 48. Border control: UNTAET’s Border Control Unit Dili and Ermera districts. Two more are in the planning maintains operations at Dili’s port and airport and at stage for Baucau and Manatuto. The facilities are the two crossing points on the border with West Timor. managed by a small group of international personnel The unit’s main functions are the control and funded by a donor contribution, with some assistance monitoring of customs, immigration and quarantine, from the civilian police. Fifty-eight Timorese have and the establishment, training and development of the been recruited as prison wardens and are being trained Border Service of East Timor. UNTAET has tightened by the international personnel. customs and immigration controls at ports of entry and has collected US$ 2.4 million in revenues. More than 44. Police: since January, UNTAET’s civilian police 2,000 temporary travel documents have been issued to grew from 400 to 1,270 officers from the following East Timorese travellers. countries: Argentina (5), Australia (80), Austria (10), Bangladesh (35), Bosnia and Herzegovina (12), Brazil 49. The Border Control Unit has received support (13), Canada (14), Cape Verde (2), China (15), Egypt from Australia, Finland, Portugal, New Zealand and the (10), the Gambia (26), Ghana (91), Jordan (219), United States, which have made available customs and Kenya (14), Mozambique (3), Namibia (9), Nepal (47), immigration personnel. The Border Service of East New Zealand (12), the Niger (21), Nigeria (51), Timor now includes 37 international officers and 147 Norway (1), Pakistan (1), Philippines (105), Portugal East Timorese officers. To date, 90 Timorese border (165), the Russian Federation (3), Samoa (25), Senegal service officers have completed a basic training course; (16), Singapore (40), Slovenia (2), Spain (19), Sri all receive in-service training. Lanka (30), Thailand (29), Turkey (18), the United Kingdom (14), Ukraine (8), the United States of Civilian staffing America (80), Zambia (5) and Zimbabwe (20). Included in the above are two Rapid Response Units of 50. As of 21 July, UNTAET had 2,684 civilian staff, 120 each from Jordan and Portugal. of whom 1,886 were recruited locally and 798 45. The first group of cadets of the new Timor internationally. UNTAET continues to lack experts and Lorosa’e Police Service (TLPS) graduated from the experienced administrators. The shortage of experts is Police Training College on 11 July. The second class mainly in the fields of land and property, customs, began on 17 July. The current capacity of the college is statistics, trade and commerce, agriculture, judicial 50 cadet recruits per 12-week training period. The affairs and infrastructure. A significant obstacle for the building of police capacity is thus very slow. mission has been the lack of qualified interpreters and Accelerating it would require funding beyond the translators. current East Timor budget. The Timor Lorosa’e Police Unit has been established at UNTAET’s civilian police VI. Security headquarters to facilitate the induction of the Timorese into the positions currently held by international 51. A phased transfer of responsibility from the personnel. International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) to 46. UNTAET follows a community-based approach UNTAET’s military component took place during the to policing, participating in local problem-solving month of February. Since then UNTAET’s force has meetings and other community activities. Traditional conducted security operations throughout the country mechanisms of conflict resolution are commonly used. and has supported the activities of other components, notably the police, helped with the delivery of relief 47. UNTAET continues to receive reports of human goods in remote areas, and provided medical care to rights violations committed in the context of the civilians. popular consultation. An investigation unit has been established in the Human Rights Unit to look into these 52. The security situation has been generally stable. cases. In this context, there have been approximately However, there was a period from late February to 345 exhumations across East Timor since 25 October mid-March during which UNTAET’s military positions 1999. Some 40 other grave sites have been identified near the border came under fire and four significant and marked awaiting exhumation. cross-border incursions were carried out by militia

7

groups operating from West Timor. Following these (1), the United Kingdom (4) and the United States (4). attacks, UNTAET’s Force Commander and the Director On 21 July, Lieutenant General Boonsrang Niumpradit of Political Affairs travelled to Jakarta where they met (Thailand) replaced Lieutenant General Jaime de los with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Chief of Santos (Philippines) as Force Commander. the Armed Forces. As a result of these meetings, the 56. When planning for UNTAET’s military Indonesian armed forces undertook to renew efforts to component last year, the aim was to create a ensure security along the border and prevent militia sufficiently robust force so as not to invite challenges infiltration into East Timor. On 11 April, UNTAET’s after it took over from INTERFET. It was envisaged Force Commander and the commander of the that the strength of the force could be reduced if the Indonesian forces in West Timor signed a situation remained stable. This has turned out to be the Memorandum of Understanding regarding tactical case, especially in the eastern sector. Given also the coordination in the border area to enhance the improved capacity of the police, it is intended to effect cooperation. The Indonesian armed forces positioned a a reduction in that sector from currently 1,850 to a second battalion and a brigade headquarters on the battalion-size force of 500 by the end of January 2001. border. 57. The military observers provided a United Nations 53. Thereafter, the situation along the border was presence in the districts before the military and civilian quieter. However, there was a grenade attack against an components were fully deployed. Their strength will UNTAET post on 28 May, in which an Australian now be reduced to 150, and a further reduction is being soldier was injured, and another attack on 21 June. On considered. They continue to carry out important 24 July, an UNTAET patrol, investigating a reported liaison functions, especially with the Indonesian armed cross-border incursion in the Cova Lima district, was forces and FALINTIL. attacked with automatic fire. A New Zealand soldier was killed in the incident. The incident is the subject of 58. It was not originally envisaged that East Timor an ongoing investigation. There have also been isolated would have armed forces, except for security personnel incidents of shots being fired along the border, associated with the police. Initially, CNRT supported particularly in the north. this view, bearing in mind the country’s limited resources. CNRT has changed its position and now 54. Since October 1999, the troops of the Armed advocates the establishment of a national security Forces for the National Liberation of East Timor force, initially based on members of FALINTIL. East (FALINTIL) have been cantoned in the Aileu district. Timor will, of course, be free to decide this matter after Difficult living conditions, lack of supplies and lack of independence. However, CNRT leaders regard the clarity about their current and future role have recently establishment of such a force as a necessary element in led to concerns over discipline and morale. FALINTIL the transition to independence so that East Timor is has sent a number of its personnel home on leave, able to guard its borders when UNTAET leaves. With reducing the number in the cantonment area from over financial support from the United Kingdom, a team 1,000 in October to less than 500 at present. UNTAET organized by King’s College, London, is currently has allocated US$ 100,000 from the Consolidated undertaking a study of East Timor’s future defence and Budget of East Timor to provide food for two months security needs and their practical and financial to the FALINTIL personnel and their dependants. implications. The study is to be completed in August, 55. The current strength of UNTAET’s military following which there will be a broad discussion of its component is 8,032 all ranks, including 198 military recommendations. observers, from the following countries: Australia (1,542), Bangladesh (572), Bolivia (2), Brazil (81), VII. Humanitarian affairs Canada (3), Chile (33), Denmark (2), Egypt (83), Fiji (188), France (6), Ireland (44), Jordan (720), Kenya 59. UNTAET’s Humanitarian and Emergency (252), Malaysia (32), Mozambique (12), Nepal (168), Rehabilitation component plays the central New Zealand (675), Norway (6), the Republic of Korea coordinating role for humanitarian activities, providing (444), Pakistan (804), Peru (23), the Philippines (623), leadership and close liaison with all actors. Regular Portugal (759), the Russian Federation (2), Singapore meetings at central and district levels and weekly (24), Sweden (2), Thailand (919), Turkey (2), Uruguay

8

sectoral groups (some of which are coordinated by the cent was for food assistance, repatriation of refugees Governance and Public Administration component) and shelter support. Funds were spent evenly across the continued to bring together humanitarian agencies to 13 districts of East Timor, except for Dili district, ensure country-wide coverage. A coordination centre which received more. has been set up to support non-governmental organizations and, in particular, to develop the capacity VIII. Observations of local development organizations. This centre has recently been handed over to East Timorese 63. When I reported to the Security Council last management with ongoing support from UNTAET. January, UNTAET was a fledgling operation, still 60. WFP has coordinated logistical support for the building its own capacity while trying to advance as humanitarian effort since October 1999, with support fast as possible on a broad range of issues. Today, first from INTERFET, then from UNTAET’s military although it has not yet reached its full designated component and other United Nations agencies. capacity, UNTAET can look with satisfaction on what Logistics for country-wide food distributions have been it has achieved so far. It has contributed to the efficiently managed with more than 35,000 metric tons alleviation of the emergency brought about by the distributed since September 1999 by WFP, the violence and destruction that followed the popular International Committee of the Red Cross and non- consultation last year; it has maintained a secure governmental organizations. The general food environment; it has established the foundations of an distributions, which averted a large-scale emergency, effective administration; and, above all, it has have been replaced by targeted distributions to established a relationship of mutual respect and trust vulnerable groups and schools and incentives for work. with the East Timorese. 61. The supply of “phase 2” (semi-permanent) shelter 64. The last six months have also made clearer how materials was hindered by delays in delivery from daunting the task is that the United Nations has external sources, the prolonged rainy season and undertaken in East Timor. The Organization had never widespread deterioration of the road network. Many before attempted to build and manage a State. Nor did subdistricts were cut off from central stores. it have an opportunity to prepare for this assignment; Distribution of shelter material has now accelerated: the team in East Timor had to be assembled ad hoc and 13,500 house kits (out of the planned 35,000) have still lacks important expertise in a number of fields. been distributed by UNHCR and its implementing 65. The relationship between UNTAET and the East partners. A further 10,000 kits have been distributed by Timorese is obviously crucial for the attainment of the other humanitarian actors. Continuation of the shelter mandate. While Security Council resolution 1272 programme remains a top priority, and the delivery of (1999) gives the United Nations exclusive authority, shelter material has been extended by six months to the my Special Representative has chosen to proceed only end of 2000. Timber has been imported to reduce the in the closest possible consultation with the East negative impact of rebuilding on the East Timor Timorese and with their full consent. The appointment environment. of Timorese as heads of department is a further step 62. Conditions in East Timor have somewhat towards the increased sharing of political improved, and the immediate emergency is considered responsibility. over. The focus has now shifted to reconstruction and 66. UNTAET has maintained close contact with the rehabilitation. A country-wide review of the different political groupings, notably with CNRT and humanitarian operation resulted in the overall its President, Mr. Xanana Gusmão, who is the most conclusion that humanitarian assistance had been respected Timorese leader and commands great delivered in a timely and effective manner. One lesson personal authority. However, signs of intolerance of learned concerned the need to improve consultation other political groups that have surfaced in recent with the beneficiaries and local civil leaders in such weeks are cause for concern. I trust that CNRT will operations. The review also served as a preliminary defend the political freedom for which it has fought account to donors for all funds spent in the period and will welcome and encourage the broader October 1999-April 2000. Of the US$ 150 million received, 79 per cent had been spent, of which 59 per

9

participation in the political process that the creation of members of UNTAET and of the agencies and the National Council was intended to promote. organizations that have been a part of this effort. They have done very well in difficult conditions, bringing 67. East Timor’s best assurance of a secure future lies great credit on themselves and on the United Nations. in healthy relations with the countries in the region, particularly Indonesia, its closest neighbour. Great progress has been made in this regard, owing in no small measure to the personal efforts of President Wahid and Mr. Gusmão. However, the unresolved issue of the East Timorese refugees in West Timor, the activities of pro-integration militias, who exercise control over the refugees, and continuing cross-border attacks by groups based in West Timor are very disturbing, as highlighted by the fatal shooting of a United Nations soldier. I expect that effective steps will be taken by the Indonesian authorities to bring the situation fully under control.

68. When I visited East Timor last February, I asked my Special Representative to establish benchmarks to guide the activities of the mission towards achieving minimum goals in East Timor that would provide the East Timorese with a sound platform for governing their country when independence was achieved. The key areas are: to ensure security during the transitional period and arrangements for East Timor’s security once it is independent; to establish a credible system of justice in which fundamental human rights are respected; to achieve a reasonable level of reconstruction of public services and infrastructure; to establish an administration that is financially sustainable; and to manage a political transition to independence, culminating in the adoption of a constitution and democratic elections.

69. The last objective is, no doubt, the most important, since it entails the establishment of a political system that is responsive to the citizens and a political leadership that is responsible in its decisions. The East Timorese are increasingly impatient to take responsibility for their affairs and do not wish the transition period to continue for too long. Indeed, many would hope to reach independence by the end of next year, in the full knowledge that East Timor, as one of the least developed countries, will require international support for some time to come.

70. Finally, I should like to express my deep appreciation to the Member States that have supported this difficult mission by contributing personnel, equipment and financial support. I also wish to pay a warm tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello and all the

10

