<!-- image -->

Distr.: General 26 July 2000

Original: English

## Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor

(for the period 27 January-26 July 2000)

## I. Introduction

- 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of 25 October 1999,  by  which  the  Council  decided  to  establish  the United  Nations  Transitional Administration  in East Timor  (UNTAET).  In  paragraph  18  of  that  resolution, the  Council  requested  the  Secretary-General  to  submit a report within three months of the date of adoption of that  resolution  and  every  six  months  thereafter.  The current  report  covers  the  activities  of  UNTAET  and developments  in  East  Timor  since  the  submission  of the last report on 26 January 2000. During this period, the  Council  received  five  public  briefings,  which  are contained in the Council's records (S/PV.4097, S/PV.4114, S/PV.4133, S/PV.4147 and S/PV.4165). Matters covered in those briefings will not be repeated here,  except  in  summary  form.  Seventeen  regulations issued by UNTAET during this period will be issued as an addendum to this report.

## II. Political transition

- 2. The  15-member  National  Consultative  Council (NCC),  which  was  established in December  1999, played a crucial role as the primary mechanism through which  the  East  Timorese  participated  in  UNTAET's decision-making.  However,  it  became  clear  over  time that its membership needed to be expanded to facilitate broader participation in policy-making. After intensive consultation, the National Council (NC) was created on 14  July  to  replace  NCC.  It  will  have  33  members,  all

Timorese,  appointed by the  Transitional  Administrator as  follows:  one  from  each  of  the  13  districts,  7  from political parties within the National Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT), three from other parties, and one each representing youth, students, nongovernmental  organizations,  the  professions,  farmers, labour,  business,  the  Catholic  Church,  the  Protestant Church  and  the  Muslim  community.  Consultations  are under  way  regarding  the  selection  of  the  Council's members.

- 3. At the same time,  UNTAET reorganized itself to resemble  more  closely  the  future  government  and  to increase  the  direct  participation  of  the  Timorese,  who thus assume a greater share of the political responsibility.  Eight  portfolios  were  created:  internal administration,  infrastructure,  economic  affairs,  social affairs, finance, justice, police and emergency services, and political affairs. The first four have been entrusted to  East  Timorese,  the  other  four  to  senior  UNTAET staff members. They were sworn in on 15 and 17 July. The  eight  officials form  a  Cabinet  chaired  by  the Special  Representative  of  the  Secretary-General.  It  is responsible for formulating policies and recommending regulations and  directives for consideration by the National  Council.  The  Special  Representative  of  the Secretary-General retains full responsibility as Transitional Administrator in accordance with Security Council resolution 1272 (1999).
- 4. When  UNTAET  was  established,  there  was  no history of open and democratic political activity in East Timor.  Since  then,  CNRT  and  its  component  parties have been active, and new political organizations have

emerged. The Socialist Party of East Timor, the Labour Party,  the  Popular  Defence  Council  of  the  Democratic Republic  of  East  Timor  (CPD-RDTL)  and  the  United Christian  Democracy  Party  have  set  up  branch  offices and organized demonstrations and other political events. The East Timor National Liberation Front (FRETILIN), the largest component of CNRT, organized a series of regional conferences, culminating in a national conference in Dili last May.

- 5. Regrettably,  there  have  been  disturbing  cases  of intimidation  against  groups  and  parties  not  under  the CNRT  umbrella.  CPD-RDTL,  a  group  that  split  from FRETILIN, has  encountered  sometimes  violent  CNRT opposition, especially in the Suai area. In June, unknown  assailants  vandalized  the  Dili  office  of  the Student  Solidarity  Council,  one  of  the  strongest  proindependence groups in East Timor prior to the popular consultation.  In  March,  death  threats  were  directed against  staff  of  the  Catholic  Radio  Timor  Kmanek  to prevent  their  announcers'  speaking  about  politics  on the  radio.  Ethnic  and  religious  minorities  have  also been  the  targets  of  harassment  and  intimidation.  On  8 June, the Protestant churches in Ermera and Aileu were burned. There were also several attacks on the mosque in Dili, and ethnic Chinese were threatened and harassed.
- 6. In  order  to  counter  these  tendencies  and  prepare the  population  for  democratic  elections,  UNTAET  has launched a programme entitled 'The future of democracy in East Timor' which targets a broad crosssection of East Timorese society. The programme aims to promote civic education, constitutional development, the  rule  of  law  and  political  education.  UNTAET  has also disseminated information on human rights through its  police  and  non-governmental  organizations  and  is working  with  local  community  leaders  to  develop  a culture of tolerance.
- 7. Apart  from  these  special  efforts,  UNTAET  has promoted  the  free  flow  of  information  and  ideas  by supporting local media (two newspapers and two news magazines)  and  through  its own  operations  (radio, limited television broadcasts, fortnightly newsletter), as well as through providing training for East Timorese.

## III. Relations with Indonesia

- 8. The normalization of relations between Indonesia and  East  Timor  has  progressed  well.  President  Wahid

visited  Dili  on  29  February,  where  he  was  warmly welcomed.  On  this  occasion,  agreements  were  signed, concerning the promotion of trade and communication, the establishment of representative offices, and continued access by East Timorese to academic institutions  in  Indonesia.  Agreement  was  also  reached on  the  establishment  of  a  border  regime  to  facilitate access for people and goods  between  the Oecussi enclave  and  the  rest  of  East  Timor  as  well  as  crossborder trade.

- 9. Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, has twice visited  Jakarta  since  then  and  Mr.  Xanana  Gusm達o, President of CNRT, visited Jakarta on 28 April,  where he  met  with  President  Wahid  and  senior  government officials to further strengthen bilateral relations.
- 10. On 6 April, Indonesia and UNTAET concluded a Memorandum  of Understanding on cooperation in legal, judicial and human rights matters. In accordance with the memorandum,  UNTAET  has  assisted  the Indonesian  authorities  in  their  efforts  to  identify  and prosecute those responsible for human rights violations in  East  Timor  in  1999.  To  this  end,  UNTAET  has located  and  interviewed  witnesses  and  provided  the results to Indonesian investigators.
- 11. On 5 July, agreement was reached on the establishment  of  a  Joint  Border  Committee,  which  is responsible for managing all cross-border matters. Key outstanding issues are an arrangement for transit between  the  Oecussi  enclave  and  the  rest  of East Timor,  which  is  critical  for  the  future  well-being  of Oecussi, and the payment of pensions to former employees who wish to reside in East Timor. The early resolution of this question would  encourage many refugees to return home.
- 12. UNTAET  has  established  offices  in  Jakarta  and Kupang,  and  Indonesia  has  a  mission  in  East  Timor. The  office  in  Kupang  helped  coordinate  UNTAET's assistance to flood victims on both sides of the border between  East  and  West  Timor  in  May.  It  has  been closely involved with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in initiatives designed to encourage reconciliation and the return  of  the  refugees  who  remain  in  West  Timor  and Java.

## IV. Refugees

- 13. More  than  167,000  refugees  have  returned  from Indonesia, primarily from West Timor. The repatriation effort is coordinated  by  UNHCR;  the  International Organization for Migration (IOM) arranges their movement to their destinations. This activity has proceeded  with  few  incidents  and  the  reintegration  of the  refugees  into  their  original  communities  has  been generally smooth.
- 14. UNTAET supported  the  work  of  UNHCR  at  the political level by promoting reconciliation and preparing the communities in East Timor for the return of those of the refugees who had opposed independence. This  was  done  in  discussions  involving local  organizations  and,  often,  the  church.  UNTAET also  arranged  visits  to  East  Timor  by  some  militia leaders  so  that  they  would  know  what  to  expect  when they and their followers returned.
- 15. The  Governor  of  West  Timor,  Mr.  Piet  Tallo, visited  East  Timor  on  8  June  and  met  Mr.  Vieira  de Mello  and  Mr.  Xanana  Gusm達o  as  well  as  other  East Timorese leaders. Subsequently, on 9 and 10 June, the Bishop  of  Baucau,  Mr.  Basilio  Nascimento,  visited West Timor.
- 16. Despite these efforts, an estimated 85,000 to 120,000  refugees  remain  in  camps  in  West  Timor, where  militias  opposed  to  independence  continue  to exercise great influence and impede the work of UNHCR by intimidation and violence.  As a  result,  an important  effort  by  UNHCR  to  register  refugees  and determine whether they wished to return or be resettled was repeatedly delayed and had to be postponed indefinitely  earlier  this  month,  when  militia  members attacked UNHCR's workers.
- 17. UNHCR has increased its efforts to persuade the Indonesian  authorities  to  assume  their  obligations  and act on  commitments  made.  These  include  free  and unhindered  access  to  the  refugees,  ensuring  the  safety of  humanitarian  workers  and  the  separation  of  former military  personnel,  police  and  civil  servants  from  the refugees. If these obligations are not met, UNHCR may be compelled to withdraw from some or all camps.

## V. Governance and public administration

## Civil service

- 18. UNTAET has continued to build the  foundations of  governance,  including  a  legal  framework,  a  central financial capacity and a civil service structure. This has been  done  with  a  view  to  transferring  administrative functions to a sustainable East Timorese administration. The recruitment of Timorese civil servants is conducted through an open process based on competition  and  merit,  under  the  supervision  of  the Public Service Commission.
- 19. There  are  now  5,275  civil  service  employees  in the  East  Timor  administration,  including  teachers  and health workers on temporary contracts. Permanent hiring  began  in  July  and  the  Civil  Service  Academy was inaugurated on 8 May. In cooperation with UNTAET, the United Nations Development Programme  (UNDP)  is  preparing a comprehensive project,  amounting  to  approximately  US$  30  million, for capacity-building in governance and public administration. In the second half of the year, UNDP, in conjunction with Portugal's National Institute of Public Administration, will provide courses for political leaders  in  globalization,  constitutional  issues,  project development  and  implementation,  and  ethics  for  210 persons.  UNTAET is  working  with  CNRT  and  donors to establish a diplomatic training course; the first round of training for 50 students will begin on 31 July.

## Public finance

- 20. During the reporting period, UNTAET established the Central Fiscal Authority and the Central Payments  Office.  Recruitment  of  Timorese  staff  has begun  and  will  be  followed  by  specialized  training, assisted by the Asian Development Bank. The Treasury has been established within the Central Fiscal Authority.  It  is  responsible  for  the  execution  of  the budget, including expenditure, control and monitoring. The  Revenue  Service  has  been  established  and  a  tax system  instituted, which  includes  a  service tax on restaurants,  hotels,  telecommunications  and  transport rentals.
- 21. The consolidated budget for 2000/01, and projections  for  the  next  two  years  were  presented  to

donors in Lisbon in June and were favourably received. The  budget  provides  for  recurrent  spending  of  US$ 43.63 million and capital spending of US$ 15.6 million.  Financing  this  budget  will  require  additional contributions  to  the  UNTAET  Trust  Fund  of  US$  16 million. Contributions to the Trust Fund stand at about US$ 28.5 million.

- 22. Public  spending  under  the  UNTAET  Trust  Fund was limited in the first  months of the  mission because of  normal  delays  as  programmes  were  being  planned, with  expenses  being  met  by  other  agencies  as  part  of relief  programmes, and  difficulties  in  the  procurement of certain goods and services, as well as limitations of port  and  warehouse  capacity.  These  obstacles  have essentially  been  overcome.  Disbursements  from  the UNTAET Trust Fund so far total over US$ 3 million on civil service salaries, quick-impact projects and expenditures for light capital equipment and miscellaneous  services.  A  further  US$  7.9  million  has been  committed  for  furniture  and  equipment  for  the health, education and social affairs departments.
- 23. A source of revenue for East Timor is the exploitation of petroleum in the 'Timor Gap' region of the Timor Sea. In early February, to ensure the continued and smooth commercial development of  the Timor Gap, UNTAET  signed a Memorandum of Understanding  with  Australia  in  which  UNTAET,  on behalf  of  East  Timor,  agreed  to  continue  the  terms  of the Treaty between  Australia and  the Republic of Indonesia  on  the  Zone  of  Cooperation  in  an  Area between  the  Indonesian  Province  of  East  Timor  and Northern Australia (Timor Gap  Treaty). This was without prejudice to position of the future government of an independent East Timor. In consultation with the East  Timorese  leaders,  UNTAET  has  been  in  touch with  the  Government  of  Australia,  with  a  view  to working out a new legal regime that  would  come  into force at independence.

## Economy

- 24. The collapse of both the public and private sectors  following  last  year's  violence,  in  conjunction with large-scale destruction, had a devastating effect on the  economy.  The  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  is estimated to have shrunk in 1999 by as much as 38 per cent.  Unemployment  soared,  especially  in  the  urban areas.  The  prices  of  fuel  and  other  basic  goods  rose steeply,  in  part  reflecting  the  removal  of  subsidies.
- UNTAET is trying to normalize border trade with West Timor in order to improve the supply of basic goods.
- 25. To  provide  immediate  relief  and  also  to  launch the  repair  of  the  infrastructure,  quick-impact  projects have  been  carried  out  throughout  the  country.  Thirty thousand  persons  have  been  employed  under  projects overseen by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), injecting US$ 3.5 million into the local economy. The Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Australian Agency for  International  Development  (AusAID)  have  funded US$ 1.3 million in reconstruction projects (mainly road rehabilitation) which  have  also  provided  temporary employment.  The  UNTAET  Trust  Fund  and  United Nations  agencies  have committed over  US$  1  million, providing employment to 5,350 persons. These programmes are coming to an end, and it will fall more and  more  to  the  private  sector  to  create  employment opportunities.
- 26. Business  activity  has  expanded  on  a  moderate scale. By the end of June, 2,696 private businesses had been registered, with over 70 per cent coming from the business community.  The World Bank-administered Trust  Fund  for  East  Timor  (TFET)  has  established  the Small  Loans  Enterprise  Programme  to  assist  in  the rapid rehabilitation of small businesses. Up to US$ 10 million  will  be  lent  over  two  years;  the  first  tranche amounting to US$ 4 million is currently being disbursed. UNTAET  has  established  an  Investment Promotion Unit to assist foreign investors.
- 27. Some  80  per  cent  of  the  population  depend  on agriculture for their livelihood. This sector saw a fairly strong recovery in the first half of this year, owing to a good  coffee  crop  and  strong  domestic  demand.  Public investment is foreseen to promote recovery and reduce poverty  in  rural  areas  and  to  support  medium-term initiatives to create a sustainable base for future increases in productivity. A regulation was promulgated in May prohibiting the logging and export of  wood  from  East  Timor  in  order  to  halt  the  damage already  caused  by  unregulated  logging.  The  design  of projects  began  in  July  to  ensure  the  protection  and preservation of existing water supplies through community-based watershed management and reforestation programmes.
- 28. East  Timor  has  inherited  a  complex  and  often contradictory system of land ownership. This has caused  uncertainty  and  many  disputes.  UNTAET  is

making preparations for a Land and Property Commission to restore and maintain  the  land  registry; resolve  disputes  through  mediation,  arbitration  and, where necessary, adjudication; and  allocate  abandoned public and  private property. UNTAET  officials  are currently involved as mediators in the resolution of two complex land disputes in Viqueque and Baucau.

## Infrastructure

- 29. Prolonged rains and heavy traffic by the International  Force  in  East  Timor  (INTERFET)  and UNTAET have exacerbated the already poor condition of the road network. Several main  arteries closed during  April  and  May  owing  to  land  slips  and  the collapse of bridges. In February, a mission coordinated by the Asian Development Bank agreed on a remedial strategy for emergency rehabilitation, restoring normal government services for routine, emergency and periodic maintenance, and implementing a capital programme of pavement rehabilitation and strengthening.  The  full  contracts  were  mobilized  in early June.
- 30. Dili's port is a critical bottleneck, and rehabilitation work is under way to increase its capacity  at  a  cost  of  approximately  US$  7  million. Japan  will  provide  navigational  equipment  worth  US$ 2.6 million.  The  airports  in  Dili  and  Baucau  have suffered damage  owing  to  inadequate  maintenance, destruction,  theft  of  equipment  and  heavy  use  over recent  months.  Emergency  runway  repairs  are  under way in Dili.
- 31. Intensive efforts were undertaken to restore electricity  to  Dili  and  the  surrounding  villages  with support from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. However, more needs to be done, and power cuts remain frequent. UNDP will rehabilitate 13 of the remaining  rural stations with funding from Japan,  which  will  also  finance  the  maintenance  of  a power plant in Dili. Portugal is financing the rehabilitation of four regional stations. A project led by the  Asian  Development  Bank  will  support  technical assistance  for  the  setting  of  tariffs,  metering,  billing accounts, and financial management systems.
- 32. United  Nations  agencies  and  non-governmental organizations, in conjunction with district administrations, have provided the core of assistance in the  water  and  sanitation  sector,  including  equipment,

materials  and  personnel  to  effect  emergency  repairs. No major outbreaks of disease or serious water shortages  have  been  reported.  By  May,  water  supplies in  all  13  of  East  Timor's  main district towns  had been partially restored.

- 33. Telecommunications  remain  seriously  deficient. Limited  mobile  phone  coverage  in  Dili  and  parts  of Baucau and Suai, and landlines in Dili are provided by a  private  company  on  a  temporary  basis.  The  East Timorese  postal  service  commenced  operations  at  the end  of  April  and  provides  service  internationally  via Darwin and internally between Dili and Baucau.
- 34. On  21  February,  the  World  Bank  and  UNTAET signed a grant agreement for a community empowerment project, which links support for rehabilitation and income-generating activities with the strengthening of the capacity of subdistricts and villages,  through  elected  representatives,  to  determine their priorities and manage the projects they select. The project has three major components -  grants to communities through local community councils, a cultural heritage project and a civil society development fund. Over 340 councils have been formed and more than 70 facilitators have been trained and  fielded  through  nine  districts.  The  project  totals US$ 21.5 million over two and a half years.

## Education

- 35. The vast majority of primary school children and teachers were back in school by the end of April. Some 200,000 students  will participate in the  coming  school year. Four thousand seven hundred and forty schoolteachers are being recruited into the civil service based  on  examinations  held  for  this  purpose  in  May. The conditions they face, however, remain very difficult.  Supplies  are  insufficient  and,  pending  their recruitment,  most  teachers  have  been  surviving  on  a stipend  initially  supplemented  by  an  allocation  of  rice provided  since  December  1999  by  the  United  Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Food Programme (WFP).
- 36. Many schools  are  structurally  unsound  and  need to be demolished. A US$ 13.9 million project has been agreed  between  UNTAET  and  the  World  Bank  for  a rehabilitation  programme.  The  first  stage  is  to  repair 2,100 primary and secondary school classrooms, supply furniture, books and other instructional

materials. Secondly, new  schools will be built to replace  some  of  those  to  be  demolished.  Thirdly,  a policy  development  component  will  be  established  to provide  analysis  and  options  for  the  future  national education  system.  There  will  also  be  a  project  on quality of  instruction,  through  teacher  training  and the strengthening of local school councils. UNTAET, UNICEF  and  CNRT  are  providing  short  preparation courses  for  teachers  in  the  run-up  to  the  next  school year,  while  Portugal  is  providing  more  comprehensive teacher training initiatives to 750 teachers, the number being expected to have risen to 2,500 in the next year.

- 37. Japan,  the  Ford  Foundation  and  Caritas  Norway have undertaken to support the return of East Timorese students  to  Indonesian  universities  to  complete  their studies.  A  list  of  989  has  been  sent  to  the  Department of  Education in Indonesia, which will forward it to all relevant  institutions.  The  scholarships  will  also  cover 500 East Timorese students who are already continuing their studies in Indonesia. Indonesia has provided assurances that it will complete the scholarships of 162 final-year East Timorese students. Applicants are currently  being  interviewed  for  teaching  positions  at the national university of East Timor, which is scheduled to reopen in October.

## Health

- 38. Owing  to  the  collapse  of  the  public  health-care system,  non-governmental  organizations,  funded  by  a number of  donors  and  coordinated  by  UNTAET,  have become  the  main  health  service  providers.  In  each district, a lead  organization  has  been  designated  to implement national policy and programmes. A national tuberculosis  campaign  has  been  undertaken  in  9  of  13 districts  treating  more  than  1,500  patients.  A  malaria prevention campaign has also been launched.
- 39. The post-ballot  violence  damaged  77  per  cent  of the  clinics.  Since  January,  80  health  facilities  have been opened  and a number  of mobile clinics are operating. However, there are only 23 Timorese medical  doctors  in  the  country.  It  will  therefore  be some  time  before  there  can  be  a  full  Timorese  health service.  There  is  not  such  a  shortage  of  nursing  staff, although many will require more training.
- 40. A  multi-donor  mission  in  April  defined  a  shortterm strategy of transition from the emergency phase to a  more  systematic  approach  to  health  delivery.  The

mission developed an integrated sector-wide programme funded through the trust fund administered by  the  World  Bank,  the  UNTAET  Trust  Fund  and bilateral  initiatives.  In  June,  UNTAET  and  the  World Bank signed a US$ 12.7 million Health Sector Rehabilitation and Development Programme which seeks to address immediate health needs while developing  an  appropriate  long-term  health  system. United  Nations  organizations,  in  particular  the  World Health  Organization  (WHO),  UNICEF  and  the  United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), will provide technical and other inputs to the health sector programme.  The  European  Commission  Humanitarian Office (ECHO) will continue to provide support.

## Law and order

- 41. The  situation  in  East  Timor  has  remained  stable overall. However, there was a notable increase in lowlevel personal and property crime. This  can be  largely attributed  to  the  rapid  increase  in  the  cost  of  living, unemployment and rapid, unplanned urbanization. Reported  assaults  rose  from  49  in  January  to  86  in June,  and  thefts  from  25  to  45.  There  were  sporadic incidents  of  unrest  in  Dili,  the  most  serious  of  which took  place  on  30  April  when  a  fight  between  youth groups at a sports stadium moved to the nearby central market and continued  for  several  hours,  resulting  in  4 injured  and  18  arrests.  Following  this  incident,  the police were authorized to carry side arms.
- 42. The Dili courthouse held its first hearings in May, and  the Baucau  court  opened  in  late June, to be followed  by  courts  in  Oecussi  and  Suai.  Judges  have been  appointed  to  all  four.  Temporary  arrangements, including  travelling  judges  and  prosecutors,  will  be used to clear the backlog of some 60 cases in the other districts. Six hundred  cases  are  still pending  from before  the  popular  consultation;  efforts  are  under  way to retrieve the records, but many have been destroyed. A total of 16 East Timorese judges, 8 prosecutors and 8 public defenders have been appointed. Ten more judges and four prosecutors were recruited at the end of June. All are undergoing continuous training. Four international  judges  have  also  been  appointed.  Two will  sit  on  a  panel  to  hear  cases  for  serious  criminal matters  and  two  on  the  East  Timor  Court  of  Appeal. These judges  and  prosecutors  will  also  act  as  mentors for their Timorese colleagues.

- 43. Two detention facilities have been opened, in the Dili and Ermera districts. Two more are in the planning stage for Baucau  and  Manatuto.  The  facilities are managed  by  a  small  group  of  international  personnel funded  by  a  donor  contribution,  with  some  assistance from  the  civilian  police. Fifty-eight  Timorese  have been recruited as prison wardens and are being trained by the international personnel.
- 44. Police :  since  January,  UNTAET's  civilian  police grew  from  400  to  1,270  officers  from  the  following countries:  Argentina  (5),  Australia  (80),  Austria  (10), Bangladesh (35), Bosnia and Herzegovina (12), Brazil (13),  Canada  (14),  Cape  Verde  (2),  China  (15),  Egypt (10), the Gambia  (26), Ghana  (91), Jordan (219), Kenya (14), Mozambique (3), Namibia (9), Nepal (47), New  Zealand (12), the Niger (21), Nigeria (51), Norway  (1),  Pakistan  (1),  Philippines  (105),  Portugal (165), the Russian Federation (3), Samoa (25), Senegal (16), Singapore  (40),  Slovenia  (2),  Spain  (19),  Sri Lanka  (30),  Thailand  (29),  Turkey  (18),  the  United Kingdom  (14), Ukraine (8), the United States of America (80), Zambia (5) and Zimbabwe (20). Included in the above are two Rapid Response Units of 120 each from Jordan and Portugal.
- 45. The  first group  of cadets of the new  Timor Lorosa'e  Police  Service  (TLPS)  graduated  from  the Police  Training  College  on  11  July.  The  second  class began on 17 July. The current capacity of the college is 50  cadet  recruits  per  12-week  training  period.  The building of police capacity is thus very slow. Accelerating it would require funding beyond the current East Timor budget. The Timor Lorosa'e Police Unit has been established at UNTAET's civilian police headquarters to facilitate the induction of the Timorese into the positions currently held by international personnel.
- 46. UNTAET  follows  a  community-based  approach to policing, participating in local problem-solving meetings  and  other  community  activities.  Traditional mechanisms of conflict resolution are commonly used.
- 47. UNTAET continues  to  receive  reports  of  human rights violations committed in the context of the popular  consultation.  An  investigation  unit  has  been established in the Human Rights Unit to look into these cases.  In  this  context,  there  have  been  approximately 345  exhumations  across  East  Timor  since  25  October 1999.  Some  40  other  grave  sites  have  been  identified and marked awaiting exhumation.
- 48. Border control :  UNTAET's Border Control Unit maintains  operations  at  Dili's  port  and  airport  and  at the two crossing points on the border with West Timor. The unit's main functions are the control and monitoring  of  customs,  immigration  and  quarantine, and the establishment, training and development of the Border Service of East Timor.  UNTAET has tightened customs and immigration controls at ports of entry and has  collected  US$  2.4  million  in  revenues.  More  than 2,000 temporary travel documents have been issued to East Timorese travellers.
- 49. The  Border  Control  Unit  has  received  support from Australia, Finland, Portugal, New Zealand and the United States, which have made available customs and immigration  personnel.  The  Border  Service  of  East Timor  now  includes  37  international  officers  and  147 East  Timorese  officers.  To  date,  90  Timorese  border service officers have completed a basic training course; all receive in-service training.

## Civilian staffing

- 50. As of 21 July, UNTAET had 2,684 civilian staff, of whom 1,886 were recruited locally and 798 internationally. UNTAET continues to lack experts and experienced  administrators.  The  shortage  of  experts  is mainly  in  the  fields  of  land  and  property,  customs, statistics, trade and commerce,  agriculture,  judicial affairs and infrastructure. A significant obstacle for the mission has been the lack of qualified interpreters and translators.

## VI. Security

- 51. A phased transfer of responsibility from the International Force in East Timor  (INTERFET)  to UNTAET's  military  component  took  place  during  the month  of  February.  Since  then  UNTAET's  force  has conducted  security  operations  throughout  the  country and  has  supported  the  activities  of  other  components, notably  the  police,  helped  with  the  delivery  of  relief goods  in  remote  areas,  and  provided  medical  care  to civilians.
- 52. The  security  situation  has  been  generally  stable. However,  there  was  a  period  from  late  February  to mid-March during which UNTAET's military positions near  the  border  came  under  fire  and  four  significant cross-border  incursions  were  carried  out  by militia

groups  operating  from  West  Timor.  Following  these attacks, UNTAET's Force Commander and the Director of Political Affairs travelled to Jakarta where they met with  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  the  Chief  of the  Armed  Forces.  As  a  result  of  these  meetings,  the Indonesian armed forces undertook to renew efforts to ensure  security  along  the  border  and  prevent  militia infiltration  into  East  Timor.  On  11  April,  UNTAET's Force Commander and the commander of the Indonesian forces in West Timor signed a Memorandum of Understanding regarding tactical coordination in the border area to enhance the cooperation. The Indonesian armed forces positioned a second  battalion  and  a  brigade  headquarters  on  the border.

- 53. Thereafter,  the  situation  along  the  border  was quieter. However, there was a grenade attack against an UNTAET  post  on  28  May,  in  which  an  Australian soldier was injured, and another attack on 21 June. On 24  July,  an  UNTAET  patrol,  investigating  a  reported cross-border  incursion  in  the  Cova  Lima  district,  was attacked  with  automatic  fire.  A  New  Zealand  soldier was killed in the incident. The incident is the subject of an ongoing investigation. There have also been isolated incidents of shots being fired along the border, particularly in the north.
- 54. Since  October  1999,  the  troops  of  the  Armed Forces for the National Liberation of East Timor (FALINTIL)  have  been  cantoned  in  the  Aileu  district. Difficult living conditions, lack of supplies and lack of clarity about their current and future role have recently led to concerns over discipline and morale. FALINTIL has  sent  a  number  of  its  personnel  home  on  leave, reducing the number in the cantonment area from over 1,000 in October to less than 500 at present. UNTAET has allocated US$  100,000 from the Consolidated Budget of East Timor to provide food for two  months to the FALINTIL personnel and their dependants.
- 55. The current strength of UNTAET's military component  is  8,032  all  ranks,  including  198  military observers, from the following countries: Australia (1,542),  Bangladesh  (572),  Bolivia  (2),  Brazil  (81), Canada  (3),  Chile  (33),  Denmark  (2),  Egypt  (83),  Fiji (188),  France  (6),  Ireland  (44),  Jordan  (720),  Kenya (252),  Malaysia  (32),  Mozambique  (12),  Nepal  (168), New Zealand (675), Norway (6), the Republic of Korea (444), Pakistan (804), Peru (23), the Philippines (623), Portugal  (759),  the  Russian  Federation  (2),  Singapore (24), Sweden (2), Thailand (919), Turkey (2), Uruguay
- (1), the United Kingdom (4) and the United States (4). On 21 July, Lieutenant General Boonsrang Niumpradit (Thailand)  replaced  Lieutenant  General  Jaime  de  los Santos (Philippines) as Force Commander.
- 56. When planning for UNTAET's military component last year, the aim was to create a sufficiently  robust  force  so  as  not  to  invite  challenges after  it  took  over  from  INTERFET.  It  was  envisaged that  the  strength  of  the  force  could  be  reduced  if  the situation remained stable. This has turned out to be the case,  especially  in  the  eastern  sector.  Given  also  the improved capacity of the police, it is intended to effect a  reduction  in  that  sector  from  currently  1,850  to  a battalion-size force of 500 by the end of January 2001.
- 57. The military observers provided a United Nations presence in the districts before the military and civilian components  were  fully  deployed.  Their  strength  will now be reduced to 150, and a further reduction is being considered. They continue to carry out important liaison functions, especially with the Indonesian armed forces and FALINTIL.
- 58. It  was  not  originally  envisaged  that  East  Timor would have armed forces, except for security personnel associated  with  the  police.  Initially,  CNRT  supported this view, bearing in mind the country's limited resources.  CNRT  has  changed  its  position  and  now advocates the establishment of a national security force,  initially  based  on  members  of  FALINTIL.  East Timor will, of course, be free to decide this matter after independence. However, CNRT  leaders regard the establishment of such a force as a necessary element in the  transition  to  independence  so  that  East  Timor  is able  to  guard  its  borders  when  UNTAET  leaves.  With financial  support  from  the  United  Kingdom,  a  team organized  by  King's  College, London,  is currently undertaking a study of East Timor's future defence and security needs and their practical and financial implications.  The  study  is  to  be  completed  in  August, following which there will be a broad discussion of its recommendations.

## VII. Humanitarian affairs

- 59. UNTAET's Humanitarian and Emergency Rehabilitation component plays the central coordinating role for humanitarian activities, providing leadership  and  close  liaison  with  all  actors.  Regular meetings  at  central and  district levels and weekly

sectoral groups (some of which are coordinated by the Governance and Public Administration component) continued  to  bring  together  humanitarian  agencies  to ensure  country-wide  coverage.  A  coordination  centre has been set up to support non-governmental organizations and, in particular, to develop the capacity of  local  development  organizations.  This  centre  has recently been handed over to East Timorese management with ongoing support from UNTAET.

- 60. WFP  has  coordinated  logistical  support  for  the humanitarian  effort  since  October  1999,  with  support first  from  INTERFET,  then  from  UNTAET's  military component and other United Nations agencies. Logistics for country-wide food distributions have been efficiently managed with more than 35,000 metric tons distributed since September 1999 by WFP, the International  Committee  of  the  Red  Cross  and  nongovernmental organizations. The general food distributions,  which  averted  a  large-scale  emergency, have been replaced by targeted distributions to vulnerable groups and schools and incentives for work.
- 61. The supply of 'phase 2' (semi-permanent) shelter materials  was  hindered  by  delays  in  delivery  from external sources, the prolonged rainy season and widespread  deterioration  of  the  road  network.  Many subdistricts were cut off from central stores. Distribution  of  shelter  material  has  now  accelerated: 13,500  house  kits  (out  of  the  planned  35,000)  have been  distributed by UNHCR  and  its  implementing partners. A further 10,000 kits have been distributed by other  humanitarian  actors.  Continuation  of  the  shelter programme remains a top priority,  and  the  delivery  of shelter material has been extended by six months to the end  of  2000.  Timber  has  been  imported  to  reduce  the negative impact of rebuilding on the East Timor environment.
- 62. Conditions in East Timor have somewhat improved, and the immediate emergency is considered over.  The  focus  has  now  shifted  to  reconstruction  and rehabilitation. A country-wide review of the humanitarian operation resulted in the overall conclusion that humanitarian assistance had been delivered in a timely and effective manner. One lesson learned  concerned  the  need  to  improve  consultation with  the  beneficiaries  and  local  civil  leaders  in  such operations.  The  review  also  served  as  a  preliminary account  to  donors  for  all  funds  spent  in  the  period October  1999-April  2000.  Of  the  US$  150  million received,  79  per  cent  had  been  spent,  of  which  59  per

cent  was  for  food  assistance,  repatriation  of  refugees and shelter support. Funds were spent evenly across the 13  districts  of  East  Timor,  except  for  Dili  district, which received more.

## VIII. Observations

- 63. When  I  reported  to  the  Security  Council  last January, UNTAET  was  a  fledgling operation, still building  its  own  capacity  while  trying  to  advance  as fast  as  possible  on  a  broad  range  of  issues.  Today, although  it  has  not  yet  reached  its  full designated capacity,  UNTAET can look  with  satisfaction  on  what it has achieved so far. It has contributed to the alleviation  of  the emergency  brought  about  by  the violence and  destruction that followed  the  popular consultation last year; it has maintained a secure environment;  it  has  established  the  foundations  of  an effective administration; and, above all, it has established  a  relationship  of  mutual  respect  and  trust with the East Timorese.
- 64. The  last  six  months  have  also  made  clearer  how daunting the task is that the United Nations has undertaken in East Timor. The Organization had never before attempted to build and manage a State. Nor did it  have  an  opportunity  to  prepare  for  this  assignment; the team in East Timor had to be assembled ad hoc and still lacks important expertise in a number of fields.
- 65. The  relationship  between  UNTAET  and  the  East Timorese is obviously crucial for the attainment of the mandate. While Security Council resolution 1272 (1999)  gives  the  United  Nations  exclusive  authority, my Special Representative has chosen to proceed only in the closest possible consultation with the East Timorese and with their full consent. The appointment of  Timorese  as  heads  of  department  is  a  further  step towards the increased sharing of political responsibility.
- 66. UNTAET  has  maintained  close  contact  with  the different  political  groupings,  notably  with  CNRT  and its  President,  Mr.  Xanana  Gusm達o,  who  is  the  most respected Timorese leader and commands great personal  authority.  However,  signs  of  intolerance  of other political groups  that have  surfaced  in  recent weeks  are  cause  for  concern.  I  trust  that  CNRT  will defend  the  political  freedom  for  which  it  has  fought and will welcome and encourage the broader

participation in the political process that the creation of the National Council was intended to promote.

- 67. East Timor's best assurance of a secure future lies in  healthy  relations  with  the  countries  in  the  region, particularly Indonesia, its closest neighbour. Great progress  has  been  made  in  this  regard,  owing  in  no small measure  to  the  personal  efforts of President Wahid and Mr. Gusm達o. However, the unresolved issue of the East  Timorese  refugees  in  West  Timor,  the activities of pro-integration militias, who exercise control  over  the  refugees,  and  continuing  cross-border attacks by groups based in West Timor are very disturbing,  as  highlighted  by  the  fatal  shooting  of  a United Nations soldier. I expect that effective steps will be  taken  by  the  Indonesian  authorities  to  bring  the situation fully under control.
- 68. When I visited East Timor last February, I  asked my  Special  Representative  to  establish  benchmarks  to guide  the  activities  of  the  mission  towards  achieving minimum  goals  in  East  Timor  that  would  provide  the East  Timorese  with  a  sound  platform  for  governing their  country  when  independence  was  achieved.  The key areas are: to ensure security during the transitional period and arrangements for East Timor's security once it is independent;  to  establish  a  credible  system  of justice in which fundamental human rights are respected; to achieve a reasonable level of reconstruction  of  public  services  and  infrastructure;  to establish an administration that is financially sustainable;  and  to  manage  a  political  transition  to independence, culminating in the adoption of a constitution and democratic elections.
- 69. The last objective is, no doubt, the most important, since it entails the establishment of a political system that is responsive to the citizens and a political  leadership  that  is  responsible  in  its  decisions. The  East  Timorese  are  increasingly  impatient  to  take responsibility  for  their  affairs  and  do  not  wish  the transition period to continue for too long. Indeed, many would  hope  to  reach  independence  by  the  end  of  next year,  in  the  full  knowledge  that  East  Timor,  as  one  of the least developed countries, will require international support for some time to come.
- 70. Finally, I should like to express my deep appreciation to the Member States that have supported this difficult mission by contributing personnel, equipment  and  financial  support.  I  also  wish  to  pay  a warm  tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello  and all the

members of UNTAET and of the agencies and organizations that have been a part of this effort. They have  done  very  well  in  difficult  conditions,  bringing great credit on themselves and on the United Nations.